Luneray's fluThis tutorial has for goal to introduce how to build a model with GAMA and to use GIS data and graphs. In particular, this tutorial shows how to write a simple GAMA model (the structure of a model, the notion of species...) load gis data, to agentify them and to use a network of polylines to constraint the movement of agents. All the files related to this tutorial (shapefiles and models) are available here.
The importation of models is described here.
Model Overview​
The model built in this tutorial concerns the flu spreading in the city of Luneray (Normandie, France).

Two layers of GIS data are used: a road layer (polylines) and a building layer (polygons). In this model, people agents are moving from building to building using the road network. Each infected people can infect their neighbor people.
Some data collected concerning Luneray and the disease:

Number of inhabitants: 2147 (source: wikipedia)
Mean speed of the inhabitants (while moving on the road): 2-5 km/h
The disease - non-lethal - is spreading (by air) from people to people
Time to cure the disease: more than 100 days
Infection distance: 10 meters
Infection probability (when two people are at infection distance) : 0.05/ 5 minutes

From the data collected, we made some modeling choice:

Simulation step: 5 minutes
People are moving on the roads from building to building
People use the shortest path to move between buildings
All people move at a constant speed
Each time, people arrived at a building they are staying a certain time
Infected people are never cured

Step List​
This tutorial is composed of 6 steps corresponding to 6 models which are incremental representation of the same model, starting with the simplest model 1 and finishing with the latest one, model 6. For each step, we will present its purpose, an explicit formulation, and the corresponding GAML code.

Creation of a first basic disease spreading model
Definition of monitors and chart outputs
Importation of GIS data
Use of a graph to constraint the movements of people
Definition of 3D displays
Exploration of the model
